Feat: Integration: DatoCMS guide (#3610)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/cms/datocms.mdx

- **The read-only API Key for your DatoCMS Project** - you can find it in the admin dashboard of your Project, under "Settings" > "API Tokens"

## Setting up the credentials

For safety, it is the best practice to save your DatoCMS API Key in an **environment variable**. 
Let's start by creating a new file named `.env` in the root of your Astro project. In there, you can create a new variable for our DatoCMS API Key as follows: 

```ini title=".env"
DATOCMS_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
```

If you're using TypeScript for this project, you can declare the typing of our environment variable in the `env.d.ts` file in the `src` folder. If you didn't opt-in for TypeScript usage when setting up your project, you can create the file yourself.

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly DATOCMS_API_KEY: string;
}
```

:::tip
Read more about [using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

Your root directory should now include these new files:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
</FileTree>

> ## Create a Model in DatoCMS
> 
> Before you can continue, you'll need to create a homepage in DatoCMS. Go to the admin dashboard of your Project, and navigate to the "Settings" tab. Then, click on "Models" and create a new Model called "Home". Make sure to toggle the "Single instance" toggle. In here, add a new text field for a title. If you're done, navigate to the "Content" tab and click on your newly created Homepage. You can now add a title. Save the page, and continue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a Model in DatoCMS

Before you can continue, you'll need to create a homepage in DatoCMS. Go to the admin dashboard of your Project, and navigate to the **Settings** tab. Then, click on **Models** and create a new Model called "Home". Make sure to toggle the **Single instance** toggle. In here, add a new text field for a title. If you're done, navigate to the **Content** tab and click on your newly created Homepage. You can now add a title. Save the page, and continue.
```

		query: `query Homepage {
          home {
            title
            content {
              ... on ImageRecord {
                _modelApiKey
               image{
                url
               }
              }
              ... on TextRecord {
                _modelApiKey
                text(markdown: true)
              }
            }
          }
        }
      `,
	}),
});

const json = await response.json();
const data = json.data.home;
---

<h1>{data.title}</h1>
{
  data.content.map((item: any) => {
    switch (item._modelApiKey) {
      case 'image':
        return <Image item={item} />;
      case 'text':
        return <Text item={item} />;
      default:
        return null;
    }
  })
}

```

The example below will show you how to create a component for a "Multiple-paragraph text" block from DatoCMS. The above GraphQL query requests the markdown data, which returns a plain HTML string, which you need to dangerously set.

```astro title="src/components/Text.astro"
---
export interface TextProps {
	text: string
}

export interface Props {
	item: TextProps
}

const { item } = Astro.props;
---

<div set:html={item.text} />

```

## Publishing your site

> To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/deploy/) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](/en/guides/deploy/) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider.
```

Reviewer: I'm gonna go ahead and merge this one, since this will make the CI all green for ya! ✅

## Publish on DatoCMS content changes

If your project is using Astro’s default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. If you are using Netlify or Vercel as your hosting provider, you can use its webhook feature to trigger a new build from Contentful events.

> ### Netlify
> 
> To set up a webhook in Netlify:
> 1. Go to your site dashboard and click on Build & deploy.
> 2. Under the Continuous Deployment tab, find the Build hooks section and click on Add build hook.
> 3. Provide a name for your webhook and select the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click on Save and copy the generated URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Netlify

To set up a webhook in Netlify:

1. Go to your site dashboard and click on **Build & deploy**.
2. Under the **Continuous Deployment** tab, find the **Build hooks** section and click on **Add build hook**.
3. Provide a name for your webhook and select the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click on **Save** and copy the generated URL.
```

> ### Vercel
> 
> To set up a webhook in Vercel:
> 1. Go to your project dashboard and click on Settings.
> 2. Under the Git tab, find the Deploy Hooks section.
> 3. Provide a name for your webhook and the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click Add and copy the generated URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Vercel

To set up a webhook in Vercel:

1. Go to your project dashboard and click on **Settings**.
2. Under the **Git** tab, find the **Deploy Hooks** section.
3. Provide a name for your webhook and the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click **Add** and copy the generated URL.
```

> ### Adding a webhook to DatoCMS
> 
> In your DatoCMS Project admin dashboard, navigate to the "Settings" tab and click "Webhooks". Click the plus icon to create a new webhook and give it a name. In the URL field, paste the URL generated by your preferred hosting service. As Trigger, select whichever option suits your needs. For example: build every time a new record is published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Adding a webhook to DatoCMS

In your DatoCMS Project admin dashboard, navigate to the **Settings** tab and click **Webhooks**. Click the plus icon to create a new webhook and give it a name. In the URL field, paste the URL generated by your preferred hosting service. As Trigger, select whichever option suits your needs. (For example: build every time a new record is published.)
```

---
title: DatoCMS & Astro
description: Add content to your Astro project using DatoCMS
type: cms
stub: false
service: DatoCMS
i18nReady: true
---
import FileTree from '~/components/FileTree.astro'

[DatoCMS](https://datocms.com/) is the headless CMS for the modern web.

## Integrating with Astro

In this guide, you will learn how to get the data of a single page from DatoCMS using Astro.

## Prerequisites

To get started, you will need to have the following:

- **A DatoCMS Account and project** - if you don't have an account, you can [sign up for a free account](https://dashboard.datocms.com/signup)
- **The read-only API Key for your DatoCMS Project** - you can find it in the admin dashboard of your Project, under "Settings" > "API Tokens"

## Setting up the credentials

> For safety, it is the best practice to save your DatoCMS API Key in an **environment variable**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For safety, it is best practice to save your DatoCMS API key in an **environment variable**.
```

Let's start by creating a new file named `.env` in the root of your Astro project. In there, you can create a new variable for our DatoCMS API Key as follows: 

```ini title=".env"
DATOCMS_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
```

If you're using TypeScript for this project, you can declare the typing of our environment variable in the `env.d.ts` file in the `src` folder. If you didn't opt-in for TypeScript usage when setting up your project, you can create the file yourself.

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly DATOCMS_API_KEY: string;
}
```

:::tip
Read more about [using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

Your root directory should now include these new files:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
</FileTree>

## Create a Model in DatoCMS

> Before you can continue, you'll need to create a homepage in DatoCMS. Go to the admin dashboard of your Project, and navigate to the "Settings" tab. Then, click on "Models" and create a new Model called "Home". Make sure to toggle the "Single instance" toggle. In here, add a new text field for a title. If you're done, navigate to the "Content" tab and click on your newly created Homepage. You can now add a title. Save the page, and continue.

Reviewer 2: Since this is a larger paragraph containing 2 goals, it probably makes sense to split this up, and make it more digestible.
```suggestion
Before you can continue, you'll need to create a homepage in DatoCMS. Go to the admin dashboard of your Project, and navigate to the "Settings" tab. Click on "Models", and create a new Model called "Home". Make sure to toggle the "Single instance" toggle. In the model, add a new text field for a title.

Navigate to the "Content" tab and click on your newly created Homepage. You can now add a title. Save the page, and continue.
```

## Fetching data

> You are now ready to start fetching data using Astro. In this example, you're fetching the data for a single homepage. Let's navigate to the `index.astro` file and set up the GraphQL query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Navigate to `index.astro`. Fetch the content for `home` using the GraphQL API.
```

               }
              }
              ... on TextRecord {
                _modelApiKey
                text(markdown: true)
              }
            }
          }
        }
      `,
	}),
});

const json = await response.json();
const data = json.data.home;
---

<h1>{data.title}</h1>
{
  data.content.map((item: any) => {
    switch (item._modelApiKey) {
      case 'image':
        return <Image item={item} />;
      case 'text':
        return <Text item={item} />;
      default:
        return null;
    }
  })
}

```

The example below will show you how to create a component for a "Multiple-paragraph text" block from DatoCMS. The above GraphQL query requests the markdown data, which returns a plain HTML string, which you need to dangerously set.

```astro title="src/components/Text.astro"
---
export interface TextProps {
	text: string
}

export interface Props {
	item: TextProps
}

const { item } = Astro.props;
---

<div set:html={item.text} />

```

## Publishing your site

To deploy your website, visit our [deployment guides](/en/guides/deploy/) and follow the instructions for your preferred hosting provider.

## Publish on DatoCMS content changes

> If your project is using Astro’s default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. If you are using Netlify or Vercel as your hosting provider, you can use its webhook feature to trigger a new build when you chance content in DatoCMS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your project is using Astro’s default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. If you are using Netlify or Vercel as your hosting provider, you can use its webhook feature to trigger a new build when you change content in DatoCMS.
```

### Netlify

To set up a webhook in Netlify:

1. Go to your site dashboard and click on **Build & deploy**.
2. Under the **Continuous Deployment** tab, find the **Build hooks** section and click on **Add build hook**.
3. Provide a name for your webhook and select the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click on **Save** and copy the generated URL.

### Vercel

To set up a webhook in Vercel:

1. Go to your project dashboard and click on **Settings**.
2. Under the **Git** tab, find the **Deploy Hooks** section.
3. Provide a name for your webhook and the branch you want to trigger the build on. Click **Add** and copy the generated URL.

### Adding a webhook to DatoCMS

> In your DatoCMS Project admin dashboard, navigate to the **Settings** tab and click **Webhooks**. Click the plus icon to create a new webhook and give it a name. In the URL field, paste the URL generated by your preferred hosting service. As Trigger, select whichever option suits your needs. (For example: build every time a new record is published.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your DatoCMS project admin dashboard, navigate to the **Settings** tab and click **Webhooks**. Click the plus icon to create a new webhook and give it a name. In the URL field, paste the URL generated by your preferred hosting service. As Trigger, select whichever option suits your needs. (For example: build every time a new record is published.)
```

Let's start by creating a new file named `.env` in the root of your Astro project. In there, you can create a new variable for our DatoCMS API Key as follows: 

```ini title=".env"
DATOCMS_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
```

If you're using TypeScript for this project, you can declare the typing of our environment variable in the `env.d.ts` file in the `src` folder. If you didn't opt-in for TypeScript usage when setting up your project, you can create the file yourself.

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly DATOCMS_API_KEY: string;
}
```

:::tip
Read more about [using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

Your root directory should now include these new files:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
</FileTree>

## Create a Model in DatoCMS

Before you can continue, you'll need to create a homepage in DatoCMS. Go to the admin dashboard of your Project, and navigate to the "Settings" tab. Click on "Models", and create a new Model called "Home". Make sure to toggle the "Single instance" toggle. In the model, add a new text field for a title.

> Navigate to the "Content" tab and click on your newly created Homepage. You can now add a title. Save the page, and continue.

Author: A "model" is DatoCMS' take on a page basically. It's a template for a type of page that contains a set of blocks defined by the user. I'd personally just stick to "model" in this case because that's how it's named in the DatoCMS Admin Dashboard.

## Fetching data

Navigate to `index.astro`. Fetch the content for `home` using the GraphQL API.

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
const response = await fetch('https://graphql.datocms.com/', {
	method: 'POST',
	headers: {
		'Content-Type': 'application/json',
		Accept: 'application/json',
		Authorization: `Bearer ${import.meta.env.DATOCMS_API_KEY}`,
	},
	body: JSON.stringify({
		query: `query Homepage {
          home {
            title
          }
        }
      `,
	}),
});

const json = await response.json();
const data = json.data.home;
---

<h1>{data.title}</h1>

```

This GraphQL query will fetch the "title" field in the "home" page from your DatoCMS Project. When you refresh your browser, you should see the title on your page.

> ## Dynamically fetch blocks

Reviewer 3: I'm going to stop this review and go into the file to make some edits directly to this section, not because it's terrible! :smile: But, because I really want to reorder what's here, and the only way to do that in this interface is one 80-line block revised.

I'll release all these review comments for the smaller things that can be fixed in place. Then separately, I'll do some reordering/reworking of the Dynamically fetching blocks" section. In particular, I think it's important to show building the `.astro` components to correspond to the modular content blocks first, before the page that tries to render components that don't exist yet! I see a natural flow as:

- In addition to full page content, you can create modular content blocks in DatoCMS (link)
- Each modular content block you want to represent on your site should have a corresponding `.astro` component
- Here is an example `<Text />` Astro component for multi-paragraph text
- Here's an updated GraphQL query that fetches this modular content block, and renders it via the Astro component

I would also remove the unnecessarily complicated switch case, and just display the title from before, then below it, this text content.

So, that change will be incoming, and then of course we can make changes to *it* once it's in place here!
